Time for a Truce Between Higher Ed and the Public
AMERICAN HIGHER education is the best in the world. No other country's system so flexibly prepares students from around the world to follow their dreams. No other system is so strongly rooted in academic freedom and protected from government intrusion.
RELATED CONTENT
California Students Feel Unprepared
But there is a mounting conflict between the American public and its colleges and universities. Regrettably, students are caught in the crossfire.
Many of our colleagues in the academy believe they are witnessing the corporatization of a sacred institution when faculty are held responsible for students' future employability rather than for their acquisition of timeless knowledge. University scholarship, they argue, is undervalued by the public and politicized by the powerful. The coup de grace: Government has failed to adequately fund higher education, endangering universities' missions of education and scholarship.
Outside observers of the academy often take a very different view, arguing that those in higher education have drawn the battle lines. Conservatives say universities have coddled students, closed off their minds to alternate views, and indoctrinated them to a particular ideology. This view assigns all of the blame to universities rather than accepting that larger societal trends are also at play.
Critics on both sides of the political divide – including parents and students – say college has become too expensive, forcing students into crippling debt, and fails to prepare graduates for the working world. The $1 trillion plus in U.S. student debt has become Exhibit A. A four-year degree, the argument continues, is a waste of time for students who simply want a credential to get a job.
As with most things, the truth is much more complicated. But unless we call a truce now and begin to work to restore the historical compact between America and its colleges and universities, students will suffer and America will lose its competitive edge. Too many will pay too much for college or choose not to go at all. The public's trust in higher education institutions and its belief in the value of a college education will continue to erode. And university admissions will continue to decline, as has been the case for the past six years.
As in any peace process, both sides will need to make concessions, and the changes required might seem audacious, unlikely or even impossible. Here's what must happen to preserve and enhance this essential American institution:
Academia must recognize the importance of preparing students for the workforce. Being able to get a better job is students' No. 1 reason for going to college – followed closely by learning about something that interests them. These priorities are unlikely to reverse themselves any time soon. Academia can accept the employment imperative without undermining the lofty purposes of education. Wake Forest University, for example, looks after students' employability with a concierge-like approach that includes internships, problem-based classes and alumni involvement.
The public must endeavor to understand how academia works. Indispensable principles such as academic freedom, shared governance and tenure help universities generate knowledge and provide services – such as undergraduate and graduate education and health care – that contribute to the greater good. Rather than simply viewing their relationship with universities and colleges as a transactional one in which they pay for an education, a degree and a job, students, parents and alumni can listen to what universities have to say about why they are not businesses and must be run differently.
Everyone on campus must teach. Non-academics are puzzled when they hear that star faculty members devote themselves to research and never set foot in a classroom. If universities want students and their parents to trust they are committed to education rather than their own advancement and enrichment, they must insist that everyone – even star scholars – teach with abandon.
Colleges and universities must slow increases in student debt. The cost of college in 2016-2017 was two-and-a-half times more than in 1974-1975, adjusted for inflation. And while in 1980 the maximum Federal Pell Grant paid for more than two-thirds of college costs, in 2016-2017 it covered only a quarter of costs. One analysis found 71 percent of four-year college grads had student loan debt in 2012, and an alarming number of students who don't graduate assume debt too. Colleges can ensure that their financial aid programs don't add to student debt levels by compensating for tuition increases with increased aid.
Government must freeze cuts to higher education funding. Part of the blame for the spike in tuition rests squarely on state funding cuts, which have not returned to pre-recession levels. Our public universities were founded on the understanding that they would prepare future citizens and workers, with support from the government to do so. Undermining that support puts a greater financial burden on colleges and universities – and ultimately students. The loss of funding also causes universities to put less emphasis on keeping up their end of the partnership.
With a truce in place by taking the steps we lay out here, the real work can be done to rebuild a system that encourages and supports greater access to college for all and promotes graduation on time, with as little debt as possible. America needs an educated citizenry well prepared to fill the jobs of tomorrow in order to compete and thrive in a global economy. In this peace process, no less than the future of our nation is at stake.