Trump on the back foot at home heading into Xi summit 
Donald Trump on Thursday summed up his conflicting feelings about a possible deal on trade with China’s Xi Jinping ahead of their meeting over dinner at this weekend’s G20 summit in Buenos Aires. “I think we are very close to doing something with China,” the US president told reporters before leaving the White House for Argentina. “But I don't know that I want to do it.”
There have been plenty of pivotal moments in Mr Trump’s presidency, from his Eiffel Tower meal with Emmanuel Macron, to his summit with Russia’s Vladimir Putin in Helsinki, to the historic tête-à-tête in Singapore with Kim Jong Un, the North Korean dictator. Yet the meeting with Mr Xi on Saturday evening could eclipse them all, and Mr Trump can ill-afford any perception of failure. 
The US leader has made the trade war with China a defining feature of his presidency by vowing to rebalance the economic relationship between the countries in a way that had eluded previous US administrations — laying the groundwork for a revival of American industry. 
Chinese and US officials have discussed holding a further round of talks if the two leaders can achieve a truce, with Liu He, China’s vice-premier and lead trade negotiator, ready to head a delegation to Washington next month.
But as he prepares for his showdown with Mr Xi, Mr Trump is on the defensive. His Republican party suffered big losses in the House of Representatives in midterm elections— a warning sign for his 2020 re-election bid. In addition, his former lawyer just pleaded guilty to lying to Congress about a Russian real estate deal in charges brought by special prosecutor Robert Mueller. Meanwhile, the costs of the protectionist policies he has employed to pressure Mr Xi are beginning to mount.
This week, General Motors, the largest US carmaker, announced sweeping job cuts and plant closures, partly blaming Mr Trump’s tariffs. Many other US businesses are complaining about mounting costs, and warning that they could not sustain a further escalation in the trade conflict. 
“He’s had nothing but bad news at home so he’s going to be looking for a victory,” said one former White House official who is following the talks. “And we’re well aware of his ability to manufacture victory out of nothing.”
Mr Trump and administration officials have mostly been talking tough ahead of the summit, saying that Beijing has yet to make any real concessions in the trade talks, playing down the prospects of a meaningful deal and even threatening new levies. In a separate tweet before boarding Air Force One on Thursday, Mr Trump said the tariffs on China had a “long way to go”. 
But the White House is not concealing the importance of the summit itself. It was Mr Trump who relaunched stalled negotiations with a November 1 call to Mr Xi, setting the stage for the Argentine moment of truth. 
“This is a big deal, this meeting, and the stakes are very high,” said Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council.
“President Trump has a terrific record as a negotiator, and he will know through facts and instincts how to handle this,” he added.
A priority for Trump administration officials in recent months has been to try to forge a front of traditional US allies against Beijing to help him in the talks. But although the EU and Japan share many of the US’s concerns about alleged unfair trade practices by China, Mr Trump has done little to foster goodwill. In particular, there is a running threat by the US to impose tariffs on imports of cars and car parts on national security grounds. 
Mr Trump will also hold bilateral meetings with Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, and German chancellor Angela Merkel, but any discussion of tightening the screws on China could be overshadowed by the issue of auto levies. 
“I don’t see him coming to Buenos Aires and lining up with Abe and Merkel and Macron and [the UK’s Theresa] May to say we’re having a united front against China,” said Ivo Daalder, president of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs. 
Other pillars of Mr Trump’s foreign policy are in doubt. His effort to court a better relationship with Mr Putin suffered another setback recently amid renewed tensions with Ukraine, forcing the US president to cancel a bilateral meeting with his Russian counterpart. 
The G20 is also the first big international appearance by Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman since the killing of dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi, which has complicated Mr Trump’s push to reinforce ties with Riyadh as a counterweight to Iran.
Even with Mr Xi, Mr Trump has been disappointed that his efforts to reel the Chinese president towards a deal last year at his Mar-a-Lago resort have backfired. 
“In 2017 he put his money in each of their baskets but now they are creating problems for him,” Mr Daalder said of Mr Putin, Mr Xi and Prince Mohammed. 
As he weighs a possible deal with Mr Xi, Mr Trump also has to contend with a familiar split among his advisers.
Mr Kudlow and Steven Mnuchin, his Treasury secretary, have been pushing for the president to reach an agreement, while China hawks such as Robert Lighthizer, the influential US trade representative, and Peter Navarro, White House trade adviser, are reluctant to accommodate Beijing. 
Mike Pence, the vice-president, has also taken a hardline position against China, including at the recent Apec summit in Papua New Guinea. Senior Democratic senators on Capitol Hill, including Chuck Schumer, the minority leader, warned Mr Trump not to cave in. 
“We urge you to not back down for the sake of a weak and meaningless agreement should China fail to make real concessions,” they said.
Ultimately, the prospects of an agreement to defuse trade tensions with Mr Xi will rest on the judgment of a US president who is as impulsive as he is unpredictable. 
“A normal president might feel the pressure . . . but he [Mr Trump] believes he has the upper hand,” said Danielle Pletka, vice-president for foreign and defence policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think-tank. 
“I suspect that Donald Trump will be satisfied either way — he’s happy doing deals with the Chinese, and he’s happy bashing the Chinese.”

