A New Destination for Chinese Food: Not Flushing, but Forest Hills:
Xueling Zhang arrives in the kitchen by 7 a.m. to make the day’s soup dumplings. On a good day his restaurant, Memories of Shanghai, goes through 50 orders of xiao long bao, each one swirled into a hypnotic brocade in Mr. Zhang’s hands. Then he turns to other dim sum items under his purview: tender minced chicken and onion dumplings tickled with curry powder; rolls of blistered scallion pancakes with wisps of braised beef peeking through; and sweet sesame-topped hand pies called shaobing, baked from dough stretched thin and painted with oil and lard, and folded into hot pockets that spray bits of crust, like confetti, with every bite. New York dumpling fanatics may recognize Mr. Zhang’s xiao long bao. They are reminiscent of the faintly sweet, lip-smacking versions that turned Joe’s Shanghai and Nan Xiang Xiao Long Bao into soup-dumpling powerhouses. Mr. Zhang, 63, has made dumplings at both places, and in several other kitchens, since arriving in the United States in 2002. This September, he and his family opened this restaurant of their own, a diminutive counter with an alleyway entrance wedged between a parking garage and a police station. But Memories of Shanghai isn’t in a well-established Chinese-food destination like Flushing, Queens, or Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Rather, the Zhang family is part of a small cadre of pioneers building an entirely new Chinatown in unlikely territory: Forest Hills, Queens. Past the outlet stores of Austin Street, you can just make out the familiar thwack of la mian dough hitting the counter at Xin Taste Hand Pulled Noodle. Down the block, a cafe called Pink Forest serves creative bubble tea flavors and jianbing — Beijing’s famed savory pancakes — alongside bagels and almond croissants. Snowdays, a Taiwanese shaved ice chain with locations in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens, doesn’t have a branch in Flushing or Elmhurst. But it does have a storefront on Austin Street. Each of these businesses has opened in the last two years, a sea change in a neighborhood better known for its decades-old pizza parlors and Jewish delis. “Growing up on Yellowstone Boulevard, I always knew the local delicacy was Knish Nosh or a mean bowl of matzo ball soup,” said Nora Lum, the rapper and “Crazy Rich Asians” actor who goes by the name Awkwafina. When her family wanted a taste of Chinese food, they had to trek to Flushing and Elmhurst. Her great-grandfather Jimmy Lum was the owner of Lum’s, a Cantonese restaurant that was a Flushing fixture from the 1950s until it closed in the ’80s. Her father, Wally Lum, grew up in Whitestone but settled in Forest Hills in 1987, as did many Chinese-Americans soon afterward. The 1990 census recorded just over 1,500 Forest Hills residents who identified as Chinese. By 2000, that number had grown to more than 7,000, and by 2016 to more than 11,000, with one-quarter of residents reporting Asian ancestry, according to the most recent estimates. “It’s a good starter neighborhood for families,” Ms. Lum said. “Plus it has a great school district.” 