8 Reasons why apples are good for you
When it comes to popularity, apples are considered to be one of the top fruit favorites across the globe. You can buy apples in any grocery store or fruit stand; or even order apples online to have gourmet apples sent right to your door. We all like apples not only because they are crunchy and delicious but also because they are highly nutritious.Let us talk about the health benefits we get from eating an apple a day. Apples Are Highly Nutritious. Apples are considered “nutritional powerhouses” and contain the following nutrients:
Dietary Fiber – according to the British National Health Service, a diet that consists of high fiber can defend us against certain diseases and limit the amount of bad cholesterol in our blood.
Vitamin B-complex (riboflavin, thiamin, and vitamin B-6) – these vitamins are responsible for keeping the red blood cells and nervous system healthy.
Vitamin C – This vitamin is an effective natural antioxidant that blocks some of the damage brought about by free radicals. It also boosts the body’s resistance to counter infectious diseases, according to the University of Maryland Medical Center.
Apples are filled with dietary fiber and water that makes you feel full. It also contains pectin, which according to a study made in Gastroenterology, slows down digestion and promotes satiety.
People who eat apples on a daily basis eat less compared to those who do not eat apples as part of their diet. Susan Roberts, PhD, professor of nutrition at Tufts University said: “Whole apples take a long time to eat for very few calories,” and added that “you can eat a lot of low-energy-density, high-satiety apples and at the same time stave off the feeling of deprivation.”
Jeanelle Boyer and Rui Hai Liu, Cornell University researchers, noted in their review article Apple phytochemicals and their health benefits, “Several studies have specifically linked apple consumption with a reduced risk for cancer.”
Apples, especially the skin, contain flavonoids that act as powerful antioxidants which scavenge the free radicals in our body that is damaging to our genes and control inflammation. It can also turn on maspin, the cancer-suppressing protein, in the body.